Yesterday I began creating a model of my church in Minecraft. It was Sunday afternoon. I had just been in church that morning, and it's memory still lingered on my mind. 

I had picked up Minecraft from the library. It was for the WiiU. I had stumbled upon by chance on the library website and thought that this was perfect. It came in fairly quickly. I thought I would have to wait longer. 

It would have been nice to export a map of Kanata into the game, but I didn't know how and I didn't want to bother. I just wanted to start building - I could always change the landscape later. 

I wandered through the map until I found a place that was relatively flat (although, the church itself is built into a hill. I want to add this hill later, but for now I will just build) and I started building. 

I started with the sanctuary, the "holy of holies" if you will, starting right up front with the altar. It was hard to get used to the controls at first, and I kept destroying blocks when I meant to add them. But slowly I built up something recognizable. 

It was a strange feeling to watch that church take shape. It is strange because I have been there so often. It is so intrinsically tied to my life. And there it was, the same place, standing before me in blocks. And yet, of course, it was different. It was impossible to replicate perfectly. The pews in particular posed a conundrum. How to make the backs? I settled for a half block with a stone gate behind it. There was an annoying gap between the seat and the back, but I think it stays most faithful to the shape, although not the colour. 

It was also interesting because I was completing the building completely from memory. You think you know a place, but then you actually try to recreate it... I found there was a lot of things to this church I had never thought about before. What colour, for example, was the walls in the sanctuary? I could remember the deep mahogany of the background behind the altar very clearly, but the walls themselves? I decided they were white. My dad said they were blue. I think he is thinking of the old church, before they repainted it after the fire. 

When you are building something you start thinking about it in different terms. You start thinking about it spatially, I suppose. You start to see your memories spatially. This is next to this. You come from here into there. It's not the way I usually thought about it, and yet it is, also, because I have walked through it so often.

But I looked at a picture of the church just now, and it was different. I find that so interesting. My memories and reality are being reconciled. I have to look at the church more closely from now on. Through this duplication, this minecraft church based of my memory compared to the real thing, I am learning more about both. 

I told my brother I was making the church in minecraft and he said "How will you do the semi-circle?" (referring to the sanctuary) and I said, "It won't be a semi-circle." He said, "But that's not our church." And I said, "Of course it's not our church." Our church is not in minecraft, it is only a representation of the church. I find myself making necessary abstractions. The little sink in the place where communion was prepared becomes a cauldron, as does the baptismal font (not that it is ever filled with water except on baptism sundays... this too is an abstraction) The "eternal flame" becomes a redstone torch. I am not sure how I will manage to make the bathrooms or the kitchen. You have to think of things in a different way - how can we put across the spirit of the place, rather than the place itself? 

Well, I haven't gotten very far. I'm still learning a lot. But it's definitely been a lot of fun! I am looking forward to working on it more tonight! 
